do we get fatter with age yes between 20
and 50 years old the average person will
gain about 15 kilos in weight I don't
want to be that guy what can I do okay
so Dr Giles yo he's the world leading
expert on fat and how to burn it his
book is called why calories don't count
what you eat does matter let's talk
about how we fix the Obesity how we burn
fat how we all get into a healthy weight
everyone's brain hates it when they lose
weight we're talking even a few pounds
it goes this is reducing my chance of
survival the moment you stop the diet
the weight will come back on calories
are not accurate what's the truth the
calorie tells you absolutely nothing
zero so if you actually look at a stick
of celery Raw it's got only six calories
if you cook the celery that's six
calories becomes 31. understand the
limitations and caveats of calories
veganism what are the general
stereotypes that need addressing
veganism plant-based in particular is a
diet for the privileged people who can
choose to do so we do not need everyone
to be vegan sustainable weight loss what
is the way that you would suggest to do
that the simple way hey it is the set of
numbers that you can apply to whatever
diet you like so the first is
let's talk about something else which I
feel like I was lied to about oh God
which is juice oh yes
I just want to start this episode with a
message of thanks a thank you to
everybody that Tunes in to listen to
this podcast by doing so you've enabled
me to live out my dream but also for
many members of our team to live out
their dreams too it's one of the
greatest privileges I could never have
dreamed of or imagined in my life to get
to do this to get to learn from these
people to get to have these
conversations to get to interrogate them
from a very selfish perspective trying
to solve problems I have in my life so I
feel like I owe you a huge thank you for
being here and for listening to these
episodes and for making this platform
what it is can I ask you a favor I can't
tell you how much you can change the
course of this podcast the the course of
the guests were able to invite to the
show and to the course of everything
that we do here just by doing one simple
thing and that simple thing is hitting
that subscribe button helps this channel
more than I could ever explain the
guests on this platform are incredible
because so many of you have hit that
button and I know when we think about
what we want to do together over the
next year on this show a lot of it is
going to be fueled by the amount of you
that are subscribed in that tune in this
show every week so thank you let's keep
doing this and I can't wait to see what
this year brings for this show for us as
a community and for this platform
[Music]
Giles hello a pleasure to sit with you
I've been a big fan of your work for a
very long time and I've consumed many of
your YouTube videos conversations you've
had interviews and these fantastic books
you've written but I want to I want to
start by asking you to give me a bit of
an overview of your academic Journey as
a as a researcher
um as a graduate of Cambridge and an
overall flavor of the work you do the
experience you have and the expertise
you have
so so I am uh I'm from San Francisco
um that's where I did my high school I
did my undergraduate where I studied
um genetics that's what that's why I
studied as an as an undergrad then I
came to Cambridge to do my PhD
um and I worked on the genetics of the
Japanese puffer fish Fugu Rupert Peas I
I know I know so there's a long reason
why I did that but I was looking at
molecular evolution
um so and I was well trained as a
geneticist but then I realized that
genetics of pufferfish was not going to
pay my mortgage and was at this point I
needed a job so I finished my PhD I went
knocking on doors actually I didn't look
at any adverts or anything I just went
the department I said you know what I'm
just going to see if anyone has a job
and the second door I knocked on was a
guy named Steve O ratley and he had just
identified the very first obesity gene
in humans when mutated cause really
severe obesity This was 1998.
um and I joined this lab I was I was
from a famous lab I was a geneticist he
needed
um he had just found the first obesity
genetics genes he needed a geneticist
that's how I got into genetics of
obesity so that's how I started and then
I started with the genetics of severe
childhood obesity so
um kids who are three years old but 100
pounds so so this is not we're not
talking just a little bit chubby just
just drink too much uh Coca-Cola type
type of things I mean these are
mutations which cause really really
severe obesity that's what that's where
I started my career where they can't
stop eating they can't stop eating
because in particular
so because they lack the signal between
fat and the Brain there is a signal it's
a hormone which lets your brain know how
much fat you're carrying that's
important because how much fat you're
carrying is how long you would last in
the wild if there was no food so if your
food sources stopped today so it's an
important piece of information
but if you lack that signal like some of
these children do this is one of the 100
pound kids I was telling you about then
what they have is a brain that thinks
that they're starving because now
there's no signal so the brain thinks
they have no fat when don't you have any
fat when you're starving and so these
poor kids who we think and we judge look
at that fat kid what's that look that
their parents don't care about them
right because there is a mutation
the signal is broken the child cannot
control their diet that's what I started
studying um 30 years ago 25 years ago if
meeting what happened next in terms of
your academic journey I began to move
away from extreme obesity
to look at all body weight whether or
not you are skinny medium-sized or large
and secondly I also began to think I
can't just hide myself in a lab and do
this because otherwise there are going
to be people thinking that this kid's
fault that he is 100 pounds or someone
might be a BMI someone might be 10
pounds overweight and think it's their
fault as well
um that was for me a big turning point
to change what I was doing when I was
studying to make it more General
um and to also begin to do things like
uh to podcasts or to speak speak to you
and write books and do so do things more
broadly and speak to people outside the
academic environment and you've done a
number of shows on the BBC and
documentaries right I I I found three at
least
um the first one in 2016 called why are
we getting so fat in 2017 clean eating
the dirty truth and in 2018 vitamin
pills Miracle or myth
and obviously as well you've written
these two fantastic books called why
calories don't count and Gene eating
so my question becomes why why did you
focus on food why did you care
personally enough to pursue with such
persistence the topic of food why is
that personal to you could have done
anything with your with your
intelligence why food
so well first of all I love food so so
does that I do I do love food but
actually no we followed the biology so
we now understand more broadly that when
we study the genetics of body weight we
are by its very definition studying the
genetics of how our brain influences our
feeding Behavior so there was an
academic reason for uh um for this so
just as an example why do some people
respond to stress by eating whereas
other people respond to stress by not
eating it's exactly the same hormone but
people literally respond in diametric
opposite Fashions okay why do people
love food some people use food as fuel
etc etc and so on my academic side I
began to try and understand the
mechanisms I was interested in that but
then it got me thinking about food it
got me thinking well hang on a second
when I travel just as an example
um particularly pre-covered and I end up
in an airport somewhere International
O'Hare in Chicago or something like that
and I'm transferring planes for whatever
reason I have to I find myself having I
get stressed a little bit I find myself
having to eat a big bowl of carbs
particularly rice or noodles and I was
thinking about this this became a habit
whatever airport I'm in particularly if
I was transiting I would try and find
the closest place I could get a big bowl
of noodles in fact just before I came
here what I had for what I had for lunch
I went to Bone Daddy's to have Ramen so
so that's exactly that I wasn't no I
wasn't stressed but but I was trying to
relax okay and so that was what really
got me into I said well hang on a second
what is it about food that makes me
relax and calm and that I love and then
what is it about food that makes some
people so angry you know we're almost
religious almost Evangelical about it
and that is where I started thinking
there is a link here between what I do
in my day job in the lab and I teach and
I and what have you and what I think
about you know from broadcasting from
writing and that is when I said you know
if I'm going to do something I want to
enjoy it I love food I research food I I
you know I write about food that's the
reason why because because I love it and
I thought that it was an I wanted to
know more about myself and hence then
more about other people as well your
reference to a day job there what is
your day job as we sit here today so my
day job is I'm a professor at the
University of Cambridge and I teach and
I research there so that's my day job
um and I have a I have a group and we
study how the brain controls food intake
through using cells using molecules so
that's the day job I say that I mean
this is obviously I mean the writing is
is also a job obviously but it's it's
what I do in my spare time and actually
what's interesting is it's what has made
me I think a better scientist I think
too many scientists
lose perspective and that no that's fine
right I mean I mean I'm not more
brilliant than than they're many more
much more brilliant people than me but I
think people do lose perspective and I
think you need to go out out of the lab
you need to speak to do you need to ask
what people are interested in in a
broader broader Society what they
understand about what you do and so
that's that that's the reason why I do
what I do and why I say the day job
versus this even though I merge it all
together you've been studying food
genetics these topics for almost three
decades is that accurate since 1998 25
years okay
where are we in terms of culture
um as it relates to our opinion and
perspective on food you know what I mean
by that like if you started 25 years ago
when you observe how Society views food
the relationship it has with it versus
your perspective today where are we
today
I think it depends I I think there is a
polar response to food but we are in a
polarized Society we're living today and
I think the same is true about food I
think I'm I would like to think there
are people who enjoy food who love food
we we watch MasterChef we watch cooking
programs we love the food you know we
everyone loves Nigella that kind of
thing but then equally I don't know of
the same number of people there are also
people who fear food okay now I study
obesity I do study obesity
um and I know that most of the
non-infectious diseases we suffer from
today is because of poor diet most of it
obesity diabetes high blood pressure
certain heart diseases cancers Etc okay
this is true and so undoubtedly we need
to know more about our diet and we need
to fix the diet that we actually do it
but I don't do it through fearing food I
do it about understanding food about
loving food about learning how to cook
food better sourcing better food that
kind of thing right whereas there are a
lot of people in society who are talking
about restriction of food removing
entire food groups
um saying that this is the only way to
eat if you don't eat this way it is the
not the right way
um so I think we are in a polar
situation where in one on the one hand
we cannot consume enough food uh tallies
and cookbooks and and everything but yet
there is a huge section of society that
fears food so much that they that diet
has become this toxic word whenever we
talk about diets so I think that's where
we are at the moment we are in a polar
situation I read I read this word over
and over again in your work called
orthorexia what does orthorexia mean so
orthorexia is
a type of eating disorder people would
have heard of anorexia okay people would
have heard of bulimia
so anorexia clearly is a is a
controlling thing where you don't want
to eat bulimia is there's the binging
and there's the purging orthorexia is a
fear of not eating properly
it is another
I think it's an look I'm not a
psychologist and and a psychiatrist and
I'm not an eating disorder expert but I
think it stems from the same and from
the same root there is an there is an
effort to con wanting to control
something that you feel like you need to
control some people try and control
their diets other people pick something
it doesn't have to be I mean
you could say I want to be vegan or
plant-based or I want to be keto or I
want to do Carnival whatever it is you
want to do but then you become so hung
up on it that if it's not exactly
perfect if it's not exactly like right
you don't eat it so that is orthorexia
where suddenly you have to have
the burger but it's only cooked this way
it is a for lack of a better term it is
a
analogous to obsessive compulsive
Behavior but specifically with regards
to the way you prepare and are willing
to eat that specific food
I read something
um in your first book about orthorexia
Gene eating I believe it was this book
um in chapter 10 where you cite a study
of hundreds and hundreds of
women that follow food eating accounts
on Instagram and I think the study
concludes that about 49 of the women
that follow food eating accounts or food
accounts on Instagram have
what you would describe as orthorexia
um which is startling because that's 50
that's half the half the population that
follow these Instagram accounts have
this fear of messing up with their diet
but if you look I mean Instagram I think
is a very interesting thing I mean first
of all I as far as I understand someone
may correct me if I'm wrong the majority
of Instagram users are female yeah I'm
I'm not still and actually the biggest I
think probably what what are the two
biggest Instagram
um uh styles that are that we talk about
food or you talk about Fitness those are
the two big things there's many other
things as well and you're absolutely
right when you actually look at in fact
if I look at my Instagram followers okay
just just when you go to the little
things 89 are women there is no reason
to follow I just want to point out
there's no reason to to follow me other
than the fact that I talk about diets
all the time 89 really I mean I mean I
think that so if you consider me and I
talk about food okay and suddenly I'm
some you you know Joe Schmo nobody from
Cambridge who just who writes about food
and 89 are women then what happens if
you actually begin to talk about diets
and and it is it's it's it's true and a
huge number of them
it's easy
you know I look I look at Instagram too
and clearly my pictures are going to be
a little bit blah but there's some very
very well curated Instagram pictures the
the food is beautiful the people are
beautiful
um and but that's the purpose right it's
it's sort of like a little advertisement
campaign but I think there are many many
people even though they know because
people know I'm looking at a curated
curated item which I think deep down
inside think that this could be real and
this could be them and I think when you
take people who are susceptible to this
obsessive compulsive who are susceptible
to eating disorders and you suddenly put
that in front of of someone that I think
you you it can be triggering for some
people for me I
my sort of confusion with food and
dieting and weight loss and all of these
things stems from almost getting too
much advice and I think if you hung
around on Instagram for long enough if
you hang around just for like maybe a
day or two you would hear so much
conflicting advice on what the right
thing to do is this diet paleo keto you
should eat these plants and not eat that
don't eat meat and you've eventually you
go
[__] I can't eat anything you know if
you listen to that much advice you'll go
well I can't eat anything and that
stifles you to a point where you're like
you're eating lettuce but then you
realize you're like you know and it's
just what can I eat the more food advice
I've consumed the less confident I've
become and what I can eat interestingly
I think when I was naive and ignorant
I was happier in terms of the orthorexia
you described that like fear of messing
up on my diet
I I think that the the real answer is
this the reason there is so much
conflicting advice is because there is
no One Singular right diet I think
there's some general principles we can
probably agree with okay we probably eat
too much sugar we probably need to not
eat so much uh um we need to a little
bit less meat and we need to eat more
vegetables okay so look if I say those
three things is anyone going to and if
anyone going to argue with me no because
it's a it's it's and that's probably one
of the Gen some of the general rules
but if you then begin to apply it into
your own self then the problem with
eating the problem with eating is
everyone is an expert at eating by its
very definition you're an expert at
eating I'm an expert at eating long
enough for us to be sat here having this
conversation and so when I eat a certain
way and I look at someone else and
eating is a very visible thing every
it's an open event and not only that you
then see what the person looks like okay
then in your head and we are human
beings simple we are nothing but mammals
we think Red Berry poison blueberry lion
whatever right and so you look look at
that fat person eating he's eating
something and so we begin to judge other
people based on what we're talking about
and now the major issues most people
keep their mouth shut mind their own
business and eat and do what and do what
they're doing but then you get loud
opinionated people who go on to
Instagram and say that look at that
person they're eating the wrong way the
right way is the way I eat look at me I
have a six pack you know etc etc and I
think that's the problem so the reason
why the information is conflicting is
because There Is No One Singular right
diet so it is going to be conflicting
you have people have to find the right
diet for themselves not only
biologically psychologically but also
lifestyle wise because because if you
don't find the right diet for you you're
never ever going to be able to stick to
it and and Thrive from it because you're
just not so I think that is the major
problem that's my biggest message if
anything is there's no right diet so on
this on that point if there being no
right diet a lot of that I guess is
because we have genetic differences
that's one element of it there are
genetic differences let's start there
then with my genetic makeup yep
um how might there be differences in my
genetic makeup that make my relationship
with food and eating and weight loss
different from yours
oh okay I I probably don't have as good
an answer genetics does not have as good
an answer about why different people eat
differently aside from cultural
differences at the moment okay so so the
genetics the reason behind that is
because it's very difficult to
accurately determine what someone has
eaten in order to Do genetics
what we do know because we can actually
observe is how people of different
ethnicities have are susceptible to
different diseases so famously
um East Asian people people that look
like me South Asian people Indian
pakistanis uh bangladeshis cannot get as
large
bmi-wise before becoming at risk of type
2 diabetes right compared to white
people Polynesians famously okay who can
get pretty large before they actually
end up get getting diseases so that's a
classic example where this is why South
Asian people East Asian people have a
higher predisposition of diabetes even
though obesity is not particularly a big
thing in their um in in their cultures
but then you then begin to look at body
shape that does that does matter as
matter as well where do you put your fat
do you tend to put a fat on your bum on
your tummy you know what is your um how
tall are you how short are you and all
of these things which we can see
visually we we can see
um there are people who are then
susceptible or not susceptible to
specific diseases other things you can't
see okay why are African Americans for
example more likely to end up with
cardiovascular heart disease okay less
likely with diabetes whereas why are
Indians you know more and so did you
then begin to ask the question and there
we have genetics what about in terms of
um this obese Gene I read in chapter two
of your book that there is a gene for
obesity there are more than a thousand
genes for body weight the obese Gene in
chapter two which I talk about is this
leptin Gene is this Gene which lets your
brain know how much fat you have so
that's the exact Gene leptin is the gene
that I talk about in chapter two with
the obese it's called the obese Gene
because the mouse was called obese there
was a lack of imagination
um because the mouse was a naturally
occurring Mouse
um that that had a mutation in the same
gene scientists found out what that was
and then found out that it was conserved
in humans and that's where my boss
Steven ratley then came in and found
that that Gene was also mutated in in
some humans so that's the obese Gene
it's the it's the fat Gene fat Gene
meaning Gene from fat
that lets your brain know how much fat
you have and is that possible to to be
not just on or off but slightly
defective so some people can just get
a little bit more hungry than others or
is it a binary thing where it can be on
or off so leptin
for whatever odd reason
is pretty much binary so if you have a
little bit of it you're fine if you have
none of it you're not however there is
obviously there is obviously a pathway
leptin signals to the brain which
signals to something else and there is a
another Gene that I looked that I looked
at called mc4r
it's part of the pathway it's part of
the same fat sensing pathway that is a
rheostat it's like a thermostat and so
for example we have found thousands of
different mutations in this in this Gene
and you can imagine that depending on
the severity of the dysfunction some are
completely dead some are 70 functional
you we can predict
how much someone will eat in a test
Buffet meal scenario
um if they have a 50 functioning Gene
versus a zero functioning Gene and we
now know that point three percent
okay in this country at least so point
so 200 000 people in the UK a million
people in the United States will carry
mutations in this mc4r Gene okay making
them more likely to end up with obesity
so that at 18 years old at 18 years old
if you carry a mutation in this nc4r
Gene you are on average
18 kilos heavier 40 pounds heavier at 18
years old on average and that's 200 000
people in this country so it's it's not
super common right it's still 99.7 of
the people's body weights not determined
by this but there are a lot of people's
body weights who are dependent on this
specific Gene but it is a it is a
tunable system so it's a little bit or a
lot means that you're either slightly
heavier or a lot heavier to does our
brain like us losing weight I I did the
keto diet recently for about two months
and why did you do it why'd you come off
I did it because I wanted to okay this
is interesting it shows how much of a
neanderthal I am
um I I thought I was allergic to gluten
hey so I thought I'll cut out all of the
things that have gluten in them and I'll
try that and so I then watched this
video online and it talked about the
keto diet so I thought oh that sounds
good and I this guy had lost so much
weight doing it so I gave it a try now I
lost so much weight more weight than
I've ever lost in my life like I extreme
um I did it for about eight weeks I lost
about a stone in weight the reason I
came off it
was because it was hard it was hard in a
in a simple word it was difficult and I
I don't know I felt like I was fighting
against something
how long ago did you come off it and the
crucial information piece of information
I'm interested in is have you gained any
weight back
um 45 days ago none of your business I'm
joking
no um I gained so much weight back I
gained I didn't just gain the stone I'd
lost I think I gained a little bit more
back I think I gained a stone and a bit
back uh I mean I'm not in bad shape but
like for me I went from being absolutely
lean like I'm ready for Men's Health to
being like back to being like you know
like um I'd say athletic now but I
gained back the way I lost and more
so this is why I asked the question
about the brain my brain didn't seem to
be on board with me it didn't seem
taught the best for us and it seemed to
want to return me back to my
default base state
your brain everyone's brains hates it
when they lose weight it doesn't matter
your starting point you could start from
a point where you are Athletic versus
someone who's not athletic Couch Potato
type type phenotype the moment you lose
a little bit of weight we're talking
even a few pounds I'm not even talking
you're talking about a stone even if you
lost five pounds what happens in your
brain is your brain is used to you
carrying you or me carrying a certain
amount of weight the moment your weight
starts to go down as an adult it goes
hey oh you know this is a big flag comes
up this reduce this is reducing my
chance of survival this is what the
brain thinks and so what it does is it
begins to use strategies not conscious
nothing to do with our brain anything
like that to drag us back up Kicking and
Screaming to where we were before first
of all it makes us hungry okay so so it
makes us it makes us hungry and second
it actually very very secretively lowers
your metabolism ever so slightly so that
even without think even eating exactly
the same thing you are now storing more
than you're burning even eating exactly
the same thing part of the strategy to
get you back up to where you were before
so once you were on that keto diet and
we can debate how it talk about how it
works and whether it's useful but once
it's on the you're on the diet your
weight goes off you're able to keep it
but you said man I can't do this and so
you stop and the moment you stop your
brain goes comes back on and starts
dragging you back up this is going to be
true for pretty much every single diet
that is that is out there the moment you
stop the diet
the weight will come back on eventually
why does my brain hate me
it's what look this is the brain you
have to remember
um that that's what's kept us alive I
mean we have lived aside from probably
the last 40 years
we probably most of the time never had
enough food now clearly over the past
hundred years we've had sufficient food
compared to beyond that but you know as
well as I do when you turn on the TV and
watch Only Fools and Horses from the
from from the 70s or whatever you know
people are all skinny they think oh no
they're not skinny they don't look
skinny they look they look normal weight
for the time that they're that they're
there whereas we have clearly over the
past 40 years now have too much food so
this is now a different problem okay
that we have too much food and so our
brain is trying to respond to this
environment but it's responding in a
natural fashion because what used to
happen was because there was not a food
when there's food there you made sure
you ate it otherwise why would you why
would you not do that right so
we have a brain that's wired for a feast
famine environment Feast fam and feast
famine the problem is we live in a feast
Feast environment at the moment and
that's the issue we have a mild adopted
brain for a feast Feast environment and
this is because of how you set up
Society because of supermarkets fridges
preservatives that keep food lasting for
longer and Foods more available and
cheaper than before it's more processed
Etc right so so this is true now now
without going all food Nazi I mean you
have to remember that the all of
whatever you just said preservatives you
know pickling cooking you start with
that then you say oh we're gonna do
highly processed foods we're going to do
pre-packaged foods frozen foods
microwave Foods etc etc supermarkets it
has kept us alive okay we're seven and a
half billion people and Counting we need
to feed all these people and this is
fine the problem is we've now got to the
point where the efficiencies the scales
of efficiency and how fruit production
is now so high we can now get calories
have never been cheaper so this is this
is the
um the the the the the issue today you
can on uh um in this country for example
in the UK people have calculated that
you can get about a thousand calories
for 90p now how good are those calories
what the quality of the food or those
calories we're not talking we're just
talking pure calories because of
efficiencies of scale calories have
never been cheaper and we don't have to
go run after an antelope in order to get
in order to get the calories this has
kept us alive until it is killing us
which is now over the past 10 years that
have been an important inflection point
in in human history you know previously
we never had enough food whereas now
since the the past 10 years more people
are dying from over nutrition
than under nutrition and over nutrition
in a bad way because you can be you can
have loads of calories but still be
malnourished because you're eating the
wrong kind of foods and can you believe
it we are now in a world where there are
more people dying because they eat too
much than because they because they
don't eat enough is the worldwide Trend
that we are getting
skinnier or fatter we are getting fatter
as a worldwide Trend and and and true
that the the problems are more obvious
at the moment in higher income countries
okay because
because either they studied more and be
the kind of food that's available but
you are good but what is the goal of of
um of a country that is less developed
than us for example they want to pull
their people out of poverty they want to
make sure that their poor people don't
die of starvation they want to make sure
that fast food and and good food you
know and crab food are available to
everybody uh there as well now the
problem is the moment that happens you
don't switch from being dying of under
nutrition and starvation to then now
dying of over nutrition so we are at
that infection point where the whole
world very soon will get into a severe
obesity problem and and we do need to
fix the food environment in order to fix
that do you consider it to be an
emergency it is definitely an emergency
oh it is definitely an emergency and
it's an emergency because because
let's ask the question why is it a
problem to have obesity why is it a
problem to carry too much fat okay so so
that doesn't you might think well it's
obvious well is it because the the there
are issues with gravity when you're too
heavy um arthritis Mobility sleep apnea
you can't breathe at night but that is
that isn't what kills us okay if what
kills us is all the diseases that are
associated with obesity diabetes high
blood pressure certain cancers etc etc
that is what kills us okay heart disease
and and so it is an emergency because
with obesity at a population level as it
goes up then you have millions upon
millions of people
um that that end up you you know with
diseases so the the estimate is that
direct cost to the NHS direct costs for
treating obesity and related illness is
six to seven billion a year okay pounds
that's the direct but the moment you
take into account the bro economy days
sick
etc etc it's estimated we are running at
27 billion a year just on economic
effects on on Obesity so it is an
emergency because because many people
are getting ill many people are dying
you know
and actually it makes economically no
sense we have to fix the Obesity because
then we would save ourselves a lot a lot
of money so let's talk about how we fix
the Obesity how we burn fat and how we
all get into a healthy weight now I know
you think that bmis are largely [__]
and unhelpful is that an accurate
description of your opinion
okay look before I I don't want to end
up um with my colleagues throwing shoes
at me so I think
awesome so BMI for those of you who
don't know BMI is obviously
um your weight in kilograms divided by
your height a meter Square it's a way of
controlling for your height and your
weight
um now on a population level okay it is
actually a remarkably effective why
because a it's free to measure it
doesn't cost anything
um and on average in a population sadly
um the higher your BMI the more fat you
carry and we know that the more fat you
carry the more likely you are to be
unhealthy okay on a population on a
population level all this is true you
might argue rugby players different this
and this is this is true
on an individual level however
it is not particularly useful for for
your for your health other than tracking
your weight it's about as useful as that
because each of us are different shapes
different sizes
can carry different amounts of fat uh
can carry different amounts of fat
safely so so that is the problem with uh
um with with obesity right it's it
depends on who you are
um how heavy is heavy before it actually
begins to actually influence your
influence your health
so let's talk about food a little bit
um I'm
currently
doing some kind of version of
intermittent fasting right detail
details version well I just don't let's
call it time restricted okay yep right
you know
um basically I don't I I don't have
breakfast I actually don't really get
hungry at breakfast to be completely
honest with you I tend to get hungry a
bit later in the day so I haven't eaten
anything today and God forbid uh it's 3
30 p.m
um wow I know but I just don't I just
don't seem to get hungry yet
um and then I read your book and in
chapter three of Gene eating you talk
about front loading your food in the day
now I was like [__] hell you know I'm
trying my best here Giles and they told
me to eat later in the day to skip
breakfast we don't need it and then to
time restrict your eating and then I
read your book and then it says front
load your food have a big breakfast
medium lunch small dinner
what's the truth okay so so that is the
I mean I think most societies have a
similar saying the Chinese have a
similar saying as as this as well so
um a couple of things I was saying eat
like a king at breakfast a prince a
Princess lunch and a pauper at um at
dinner time and so the Chinese have have
a similar have a similar saying because
I think people kind of work this out now
there is some truth to this but then
I'll come back and explain what the
truth or the truth is so the sum truth
is that actually clearly we are
metabolically our metabolism is highest
during the day because we have to avoid
becoming food and we have to look for
food okay so so that's the thing whereas
at night when we're asleep our
metabolism drops so if you eat your
biggest meal at night
and then a couple of hours later you go
to sleep then clearly you you are
loading your calories and then going to
sleep which is in storage mode whereas
if you eat your biggest meal during the
day you have the whole day left in order
to burn it now homeostasis it does
balance itself out so it's not the
driver of obesity but undoubtedly it
will make a little bit of a difference
there okay but then a friend of mine
um Alex Johnstone Alexandra Johnstone
Professor Alexander Johnstone up at the
Robert Institute in in Aberdeen just
published the study I think probably
only three months ago okay which is very
interesting so what she did was she got
um people
um a cohort of people and got them to
eat exactly the same number of calories
they supplied the food so they knew what
they were going to do okay and they did
it either by front loading all the
calories at breakfast or back loading
all the calories at dinner but everyone
I ate exactly the same thing and then
everyone then swapped okay so everyone
did the did the whole thing and what she
found was that there was no different
reference in body weight change whether
or not you were eating most of your
calories at breakfast or most of your
calories at dinner it was the total
amount of energy during the day
but
the difference was if you ate more at
breakfast you felt less hungry during
the day
then you if you ate more at dinner so
while if you
ate exactly the same Foods thought at
breakfast or dinner dinner or lunch it
doesn't actually matter but for some
people it may very well be easier to
have the big breakfast because it means
particularly if they love food in
particular because it means they get
less hungry throughout the day so that
is the truth that is the Nuance but does
that mean you know I've got a first-hand
experience in this that if I'm not
hungry throughout the day then when it
gets to midnight
I'll be thinking Hmm no but it doesn't
matter right because because it's not
like it's not like well it depends
depends how much if you suddenly ate
3000 calories at dinner then then then
maybe they're no I'm not talking dinner
I'm talking midnight snack
so I I think the reality the the reality
is you have to eat when you have to eat
uh is is the answer now if you were
trying to lose weight so if you were
actively trying to lose weight because
you are active because if one was
actively overweight then you might begin
to think about when you wanted to eat
more I would probably cut the calories
from your dinner rather than cutting the
calories from your breakfast but if you
are surviving during the day and this is
true about many people right nurses
doctors who work shifts firemen police
police officers whatever they do you've
got to eat when you gotta eat so these a
lot of these um pieces of advice are
fine until they smack into the reality
of Life your job and what you actually
and what you actually do but it's
general advice for the general person
who isn't constrained by night shifts or
anything like that eating late
closer to when you fall asleep is bad is
not going to help you lose weight
correct okay everyone says this you know
Tim Spector said this to me I need I
need people to keep saying it and then I
will cancel the midnight Buffet
but I love my midnight Buffet too yeah I
know but every so often only not every
night yeah yeah not all the time you
know five nights a week
um
your general stance on keto you know
much of your feedback and much of your
writing is more about how it's
unsustainable
um is that is that accurate well it
depends so so the original keto diet
keto in its original form was oddly
enough it was designed for epilepsy okay
that was what it was originally designed
to do it's only in its most I would say
the past 10 years that suddenly people
have realized there was a weight loss
element to it as you as you personally
firsthand uh actually actually found it
so I think the original versions of Keto
were actually very very very
unsustainable because of the really
super high levels of fat that were
involved they were unpalatable and and
and and with absolutely almost zero
carbs they were very unpalatable they
they're difficult to stick to if you
have inflammation related diseases is
keto often a diet that's recommended if
there's like inflammation related
depends it depends where the
inflammation is so so if it's
information in a gut you need a
different type of diet is so so that
there is no one for a given information
right so it then it depends on the diet
that you're actually actually own but
keto in this extreme form is difficult
to stick to because you know because of
the really really high fat to protein
ratio so it was designed for epilepsy
because I think there was some reason
just to say that when you force your
brain to use ketones which is rather
than glucose which is where the keto
diet comes from it reduces the incidence
of epilepsy so leave that aside but what
then people found as well is that with
the keto diet you ended up feeling
Fuller
and so more satiated and so therefore
you lost weight because you ended up
eating eating less weight sorry eating
less food but also because you were
having less carbs then it was easier to
control your blood glucose so keto I
think is probably good
safe thing for some type 2 diabetics
looking to try and a milder form of Keto
because now there's different types of
Keto that you can stick to to try and
control your blood glucose if you're
type 2 diabetic
just make sure you don't eat
as much of the fat as animal fat trying
to have more olive oil and fish fat and
vegetable fat rather than animal fat
then there probably is a case to be made
for for for keto not as extreme for a
healthy uh individual such as yourself
you found how difficult it was to
actually stick to it I think that's
probably a case to be made for
introducing a little bit of
carbohydrates but high fiber
carbohydrates in there so that makes it
more sustainable
the issue is and I think one needs to be
careful is certainly in its most extreme
forms they haven't been many studies
looking at the safety say over five ten
years if you stick to keto all the time
how healthy is it for you and so that's
the only
um caveat that I want that I want to
point out the studies need to be done as
it becomes more popular the studies will
be done because there are many people
millions of people who swear by keto and
um and inherently as long as you don't
eat too much animal fat only and so you
have vegetable fat and fish fat and
olive oil and things as well then it can
be relatively healthy
you reference there that
um the protein makes you feel Fuller
that's that seems to be a really
important point that if you have a high
protein diet you're going to end up
eating less which will result in weight
loss right in what order does like
protein fats and carbohydrates make you
feel fullest
so a calorie of protein makes you feel
Fuller than a calorie of fat than a
calorie of carbohydrate in that order so
and and the reason behind that is
because protein is chemically the most
complex compared to fat and carbs
so so it takes the longest to a digest
and be metabolized so and because it
takes the longest any food which travels
further down the gut
makes you feel Fuller that's just a
general it's a it's a general
um um thing of how how our body works
so that's the first thing so protein
takes longer to digest travels further
down the gut you feel Fuller but then
not only that protein gets digested into
amino acids amino acids transfer across
the gut wall into our blood and they
again go to our cells and organs where
they then metabolized now during the
metabolism stage it then takes a lot of
energy to metabolize protein compared to
fat and carbs so for example
for every 100 calories of protein that
you eat
we are only ever able to use 70 calories
so 30 of the protein calories we eat
are spent dealing with protein it takes
money to make money right and so at 30
so protein calories everywhere this is
not reflected on the side of the package
protein calories everywhere are 30 wrong
just off just just just off the bat
because of the amount of energy it
actually takes to sort out to sort out
Protein that's another reason why it
makes you feel Fuller
super interesting that point about
calories obviously I talked to Tim
Specter a lot about that and um it
really is a kind of a narrative Buster
that calories are not accurate
so look I I I I speak a lot about
calories I understand that 200 calories
of chips is twice the portion of 100
calories of chips
but so is 200 grams of chips twice the
portion of 100 grams of chips and no one
is trying to compare 200 grams of chips
to 200 grams of carrots broadly speaking
that's what it is the calorie is a very
useful tool
um to give you a general idea how much
you are eating during the day that is
true okay how much you're eating but it
tells us nothing zero about the quality
of food you're eating about how much
protein how much fiber what type of fat
how much sugar the calorie tells you
absolutely nothing so it gives you a
piece of information how much food
you're eating and that's yes I can see
how that could be important but I would
like to see a world we live in where we
were more concerned about the quality of
food we are feeding ourselves our kids
other people they're necessarily just
the pure caloric content because I've
got a friend that said to me won't name
him but he got a friend that said to me
that um you can basically as long as you
count the calories you can eat whatever
you like so you can have the Domino's
Pizza you can have this but you just
gotta make sure the calories are under
your sort of calorific allowance and
then it's it's all good
so now if your depends what your
calorific allowance is and it will
clearly if you stick to a purely calorie
counting diet
of say 2 000 calories and you stuck to
that religiously okay you probably the
chances are you probably would lose
weight because we probably burnt burnt
more than that but how healthy would you
be I think is probably the question
whereas if you had a healthier diet but
a 2 500 calories of a healthier diet
would you would you be healthier and
that's that's the more important
question I think you've asked because
there's two things you're trying to look
at you're trying to look at the number
on the scale and that probably would
work or you're trying to look at your
health your blood glucose levels your
blood pressure your ability to be
energetic during the day you know how
fast you want to run whatever it is
whatever metric can you lift your
grandkids up whatever you want to do and
so I think it's a it's a it is a measure
clearly it is I'm not I'm not denying it
that it is not a measure but it is a
very blunt tool and I don't think it is
measuring what we need to measure which
is the quality of our food what is
calorific availability in fact reading
your work is the first time I've even
heard that phrase before but it seems to
be to be important so calorific or
caloric availability is the amount of
calories that you can extract from a
food versus the total number of calories
in a food so the example which I cite in
in both books actually is if you had 100
calories of sugar just just pure white
sugar you would probably end up getting
98 nearly 100 calories out of it nearly
100 okay because sugar is our base fuel
we chop once we absorb it there's no
digestion that's involved the one
example which I give is imagine if you
ate sweet corn corn on the cob
and then you looked in the loo the next
day it is quite clear you haven't
absorbed most of the sweet corn because
you can see it okay but if you take
sweet corn desiccated convert into
cornmeal make cornbread or corn tortilla
do something else with it suddenly
exactly the same source of food gives
you a different amount of calories okay
but yet it starts on corn it's exactly
the same thing so that's caloric
availability you can start with a
sourced food but depending on what you
do to that food different calories are
available there's nothing wrong with
cuantotia there's nothing wrong with
cornbread and there's nothing wrong with
sweet corn I'm just saying that the
calorie counts make no sense because
you will extract different amounts of
calories from the food even though we're
working with exactly the same food
that's crazy so if I I had um call on
the cob
like you I'm just mimicking your action
there um and then I had a corn tortilla
yes if both of them sell in the package
this is a hundred calories the truth is
my body might with the corn on the cob
only have
50 of the calories available because of
the
the nature of the the food versus if I
had the corn tortilla Which says 100
calories in the package as well
I might get 80 calories from it yes
so so let me give you another example
celery is probably something that's easy
and and we've actually measured this so
if you actually look at a just a typical
medium-sized stick that you might get
with some buffalo wings or something
like that okay of of celery raw okay
people say that celeries have an uh has
a negative calories not really but it's
got only six calories it's nearly
negative okay for that if you cook the
celery
chop it up put into a stew whatever the
hell you're gonna do with it
that six calories becomes 30 calories
because you've cooked it exactly the
same food and this time I'm just cooking
it all right because the cooking you can
almost consider cooking as an extension
of your stomach it does some of the
digestion for you right because you're
cooking it but it's gonna even stew it's
just an hour two hours and then you eat
it so then all that energy the reason
why we only extract six calories from
from a raw celery is you know it's CR is
99 fiber and water and so you
whereas if you cook it then what happens
is some of the fiber breaks down we're
able to do it that's a class another
classic example exactly the same food
you cook it suddenly six times the
number of calories you get from it it's
an extreme example
exactly because I could go to a
supermarket and I could get a um
a six calorie stick of celery it could
literally say on the package six
calories I take it home I think great
I've got six calories left in my my
calorie deficit today I pop it in the
pan I stew it I eat it 30 calories out
of nowhere correct that's false
advertising correct
I'm gonna get myself into trouble no but
it's true that that is exactly that is
exactly true that's crazy that's why I
don't think that's
that's why I don't think calories are
the most useful thing to be to be
measuring because they shift they're
moving they're a moving Target which is
fine as long as we know what what what
we're expecting but to but if you are
religious calorie counter once again you
have to do you in order to so some
people do that and it's and for them it
is a useful strategy to keep the weight
off and be healthier I'm not going to be
back on you you do what you you do what
you want but you have to understand that
religiously counting it means that
depending on what type of calories you
eat that no matter how religious you are
you're going to be absorbing different
amounts of calories anyway
but again as you as you've highlighted
there the positive upside to that is it
gives people something to measure yes
which is relative yes and and that's the
benefit for them that if they're
measuring every day and it's the same
food they're measuring it's all relative
um and there's some benefit to them
because obviously people do are very um
passionate that they've had great
results from calorie counting in their
lives it's something to measure but most
people well many people who calorie
count just to be clear means they they
stick to eating the same thing which
they've done roast chicken whatever it
is but eat fewer calories of the roast
chicken dinner now that does work
because what you're doing is you're now
reducing the portion size of what you're
eating whereas if you're saying that
wait a minute I'm going to switch meals
entirely and go from eating 2 000
calories of chicken but I'm now going to
have 16 1 600 calories of sugar that's a
stupid example but imagine that was the
case okay then calorie counting is not
going to work because you could be
chicken is better for you than sugar and
and so and so that is an extreme example
but few people do that but I I
highlighted only to make sure people
understand it understand the limitations
and caveats of calorie counting quick
one one of our sponsors of this podcast
blue jeans recently did some research
and they found that almost a third of
companies are still spending almost a
quarter of a million a year on launching
and hosting virtual and hybrid events
this is obviously Bonkers with blue
jeans new software called events and
Studios you can host these professional
world-class feeling events for a
fraction of the cost so now going
forward for all of my companies and for
myself I think we did our last one in
telegram not so long ago every event I
will host will be hosted on Blue Jeans
events and Studios and I've never seen a
software tool that allows you to
personalize and brand and an interface
and the interface itself with such ease
that's the real thing about the the
software I've done I think two events on
Blue Jeans events and Studios the ease
of not having to be an expert to create
an unbelievable event if you've got an
event coming up if you've got a virtual
event coming up do me and yourself a
favor and check out blue jeans events
and Studios it's honestly incredible and
I'd love to hear your responses if you
do give it a try you know I never really
usually pick the chocolate flavored
heels my favorite are the banana flavor
I love The Salted Caramel flavor but
recently I think I in part blame Jack in
my team who's obsessed with the
chocolate flavor heals I've started
drinking the chocolate flavor heels for
the first time and I absolutely love
them my life means that I sometimes
disregard my diet and it's funny that's
part of the reason why I've had a lot of
guests on this podcast recently that
talk about diet and health and those
kinds of things because I am trying to
make an active effort to be more healthy
to lose a little bit of weight as well
but to be more healthy and the role that
he'll plays in my life is it means that
in those moments where sometimes I might
reach for
you know junk Foods
having an option that is nutritionally
complete that is high in fiber that is
incredibly high in protein that has all
the vitamins and minerals that my body
needs within Arm's Reach that I can
consume on the go is where he always
been a game changer for me
I started to believe I think as I said
you earlier maybe 12 months ago maybe a
bit more 24 months ago that I was gluten
free and I believed that because I I'd
eaten some things and then I had like a
bad gut reaction
um some pains bit of bloatedness and and
then when I didn't eat those things that
had gluten in them that kind of pain and
bloatedness went away so my genius brain
assumed self-diagnosed that I am gluten
intolerant and then I marched through
the world for the next two years being
that kind of like pretentious [__]
that's asking if there's gluten and
everything and you know interrogating
the ingredients of everything I put in
my mouth to try and avoid this thing
called gluten
now from reading your work
I've started to consider that I'm not in
fact a genius that I'm in fact an idiot
and that I'm probably not gluten
intolerant
um and that because you look at society
and you look at packaging and you look
at signage on restaurants and on menus
they they have gluten-free everywhere
now everything is like gluten-free you
go in the supermarket aisles it's
gluten-free pasta gluten-free this
which creates the impression that where
humans are just not meant to eat gluten
and we're all gluten intolerant or 50 of
us are how much truth is there to that
so one percent of the human species are
celiacs okay and they are completely
allergic to gluten and and you don't you
want to stay away from gluten okay like
literally that's they get to the point
where it's so bad that their guts don't
work anymore and can't absorb food
carefully and so it can kill you so
that's no joke and so gluten-free was
originally designed to cater to people
with celiac disease one percent of the
human species now three to four percent
of humans and they're slightly more
difficult to measure are probably
genuinely gluten intolerant and this
could be maybe from a little bit farty
till some severe gastrointestinal
distress
um and but genuinely so and probably
it's best for them to at least not have
a big bolus of gluten but the rest of us
are not but yet 25 as a as a market 25
of us buy gluten-free at any one point
so it's become profitable to sell
gluten-free they now label rice as
gluten-free rice doesn't have gluten
never had gluten okay okay okay from
from it and so they label rice as
gluten-free thinking that it's some
product it's not a product it's just
rice
so I think the issue here is it's been a
boon for people with celiacs uh for
celax I've spoken to people with celiac
disease they go we've never had it this
good okay because before you have to go
you have to be really concerned now
every place you go to the moment you say
gluten-free you get a gluten-free meal
and everything and everything is fine
the only downside is some people look at
them you know but but so but that is a
classic example of of people
thinking that it's healthy but can I
just once again I'll stop asking you a
question soon but
did you actually go and get yourself
diagnosed about whether or not you are
gluten intolerant because it doesn't
mean that you're not because you could
be
by the way you can always ask me
questions and to answer your question
yes I got diagnosed by Dr Stephen
Bartlett right
in the comfort of my own home
but my brain my brain wrote out the slip
and made the diagnosis have you gone
back to eating some gluten yes and
nothing has happened you know what's
really interesting something after I
finish the keto diet yeah fad uh keto
diet I then tried a little bit of gluten
and everything was okay
it was it was I had a little bit of
glutes in it I didn't really notice any
any issue so and I was wondering if like
keeping myself off gluten or keeping
myself off something for those two
months had almost restored my my gut in
some respect that I could have a little
bit of gluten again
because I I kind of I don't know
it was interesting but the issue with
gut is that many so for example I will
have exactly the same symptoms of what
you just said bloated blah blah all
these things when I have lactose I'm
lactose intolerant because it is
a food substance that influences the gut
so I think the issue is I wouldn't
put out of hand some thing which you've
had with your gut it could be actually
real is it necessarily gluten was it uh
was it lactose was it something else so
so the problem is and the reason why
people immediately think gluten is
because that's what's in front of them
but it could be a number of other things
which cause your gut just for a little
bit or you could just reading the wrong
type of chilies right and and and that
that could also do it but the moment it
begins to influence your guts it has
broadly speaking the same phenotype same
the same presentation whether it's
gluten lactose or Mexican chilies so
that's that's interesting so you're
saying you know one to four percent of
people really do have an intolerance
roughly yes and then 25 ish percent of
us buy gluten-free assuming we are you
know I either assume you are gluten
intolerant or think it's healthier I
don't think it's healthier okay we think
gluten's a bad thing yeah is gluten a
bad thing if you can handle gluten no if
you eat too much of it that's always a
bad thing but no and let's put it this
way as as a gluten-free donut is still a
donut
whether or not it has gluten or not you
know so there are things which are
inherently fried and and are have more
calories more caloric availability and
there are things which are inherently
less whether or not they have gluten
what about you said you said lactose
intolerance then you're lactose
intolerant and in your book you say that
65 of adults are lactose intolerant
that's correct that's crazy that's a
huge huge majority that's a huge
majority because the mutation
is lactose tolerance so and so under
normal circumstances so lactose is a
sugar like glucose like fructose
but mammals obviously all mammals can
drink milk as babies we are mammals
um all mammals can obviously drink milk
and absorb lactose as babies but then
most mammals including 65 of human
beings become lactose intolerant the
moment they become adults
I guess that's a question of why and
then and then how why probably because
if University aged Johnny is clamped
onto your boob and there's limited space
there's no room for baby Johnny and so
you need to encourage a rapidly growing
mammal get away go eat solid food so
that other babies can actually get on I
think that probably is the real reason
to encourage animals to do the more
difficult thing of finding solid food so
you make yourself lactose intolerant how
Okay so uh lactase is the enzyme that
breaks down lactose and this happens in
your small intestine and it turns it's
turned on when we're babies but then as
we become older something else comes and
shuts off lactase like in me and so I
can't drink a lot of milk but then
around 7 500 years ago or so people
people have actually worked this out a
mutation occurred
near this Gene linear lactase which
prevents the shutting off of the gene
okay and so 85 percent of white northern
European Caucasians for example
can drink milk as adults every single
one of them has exactly that same
mutation that occurred 7 500 years ago
now there are other populations
throughout the world there's certain
pastoral populations in Africa and
certain populations
um particularly Those Who had who had
goats and sheep and stuff who then had
their own independent way of dealing
with drinking milk because it was a rich
source of food so if it was available
you were able to to to to drink it but
so that is the mutation whereas for the
vast majority of us Chinese people for
example you know we didn't end up
drinking milk as as adults
um and so we never had that we never had
that mutation and so most of us are
lactose intolerant as adults
and these things we can find out how
does one go about finding out about my
genetic predispositions to certain foods
and diets so you can okay not every
single food has a prediction for genetic
wise but if you take any of the direct
to Consumer genetic tests that are
available they will test all of the
known they'll they'll definitely test
lactose intolerance your ability to
handle alcohol okay I I know mine your
ability to to metabolize caffeine so
these are all individual genes so it's
predictable so some people can drink a
lot of coffee other people can't some
people can drink a lot of alcohol other
people can't I'm probably in the middle
for alcohol and I can't drink any milk
so all of those are predictable and you
can get from any of the genetic tests
that are there the problem I guess with
these genetic tests is they make
predictions beyond the stuff that are
predictable they say that oh we can
predict that you'll respond to a
Mediterranean diet for example I'm
Mediterranean diet is a whole diet it's
it's got like whatever 200 Foods how is
it going to predict whether or not you
respond to it and so I think some of the
genetic tests overstep their Mark in
trying to predict what they can predict
but some things are predictable milk
caffeine alcohol have you done any
genetic tests I have for for a um uh
23andMe DNA fit uh Circle I I've just
done them for some for papers uh
newspapers and writing reviews for
others just for personal
um interest just just to find out what
it is what was your favorite
because I know people are going to be
listening and they're going to be going
you know I want to take action so
where's step one and I have to be honest
my girlfriend texted me yesterday asking
me this exact question so the minute
this conversation is done I'm gonna say
I've just spoken to this genius from
Cambridge and now for you babe and I've
got you the answer
she texted me yesterday asking me for a
good uh DNA genetic test that will help
her understand diet
help her understand her diet yeah like
her like tolerance to certain foods and
predispositions okay so there are many
different tests out there testing
different things
so um
there is an advantage to going with size
like 23andMe obviously I'm not paid by
them it has an advantage to size because
they have tens hundreds of millions even
people's data and so as with most things
the more data you have and people
constantly interact with the app the
more you can
improve your product the more you can
then improve your predictions but
23andMe only tests a limited number of
the genes in your in in yourself okay so
in other words we have three billion
base pairs in our DNA each each
individual Mark a 23 and me I'm going to
get this wrong I'll probably test about
2 million or so okay of the three
billion whereas if you go to some other
companies now that now in effect
sequence your whole genome or at least
all your genes
so you get a lot more information
then they get more information the
problem there however is a is more
expensive but B fewer people have done
it and so they haven't yet had the time
to begin to tweak their algorithms and
their predictions to get a more
optimized optimized prediction so that's
the problem right okay whereas 23 me is
cheap so that's probably a good place to
start to ask certain questions look I am
happy to to like literally literally
happy to give you a better prediction
than 23me's algorithms because I can
um for for that for for example but they
probably give a pretty uh helpful look
about lactose alcohol you know and
whether or not you may or may not be uh
um gluten intolerant they give some
pretty good uh predictions there
okay I'm gonna do that whatever yeah I
really need to do I really I've been
I've been thinking about it for a long
time so I'm gonna pull the trigger um
it's quite remarkable that I haven't yet
um you did a documentary called clean
eating
which is um predominantly about
plant-based eating it wasn't predominant
I did look at plant-based I also looked
at The Alkali diet and I also looked at
gluten-free so let's talk about those
last two then so
um plant-based diet I I heard that there
was a lot of adverse reaction
from some people in some communities
regarding the plant-based component of
that documentary is that true or false
that is true that is true and and the
reason there was a problem was look I I
hope you think
speaking to me that I'm a reasonable
person I speak with some Nuance I don't
think so what we did was was a plot
based has taken on a different meaning
today okay based on the supermarket so
what have you but when I did the program
plant-based meant a far more restrictive
version of veganism plant-based meant
that you ate you ate minimally processed
foods hardly any sugar and you ate at
Whole Foods only it's fine it's a
perfectly healthy it's a perfectly
healthy diet as long as you take the
right supplements the problem is
the plant-based people become vegan or
plant-based for many different reasons
ethical reasons environmental reasons
and health okay all three or or a mix of
the three the the one issue I took with
the plant-based community in that
program is that they believed that there
was no safe dose of animal protein okay
which meant that even eating a bit of
egg white the moment you started eating
a bit of egg whites it begins to kill
you slowly in your you know because I
says that's the most ridiculous thing
I've ever heard in my life and it
doesn't support the science doesn't
support it we eat too much meat the
science does support that okay but
eggs okay
um um you know people vegetarian you're
calling vegetarians they're killing
themselves because they're eating eggs
or something that was what I took them
up on and they thought that because I
was challenging I said there is a safe
dose of animal protein we do need to eat
less meat that's but that's they went
after me they went after me oh my god
um it was it was amazing in fact the
program has probably gone around the
world probably four or five times and
the reason why I know is because every
time it pops up in a new you know BBC
doesn't tell me every time it pops up in
a new country I wake up to my inbox on
my social media and suddenly I got a
rush of hate ah the Canadian vegans have
seen it again oh look it's in Australia
oh the Swedish vegans hello you know and
and and so and it's just this really odd
Evangelical Evangelical I want to point
out I know this you know please it's the
people that believe there is no safe
dose of animal-based protein clearly
there is a safe dose
um there are different reasons for doing
things but don't say silly things that's
what that's what got me into trouble
with with the Evangelical vegans because
I've watched some sort of plant-based
vegan documentaries on Netflix and I
come away from them thinking Christ I
should never eat any meat ever again for
a variety of reasons actually the
reasons that I think they tend to lead
with are are more about the impact upon
your health and your diet I think that
that's a much more
compelling
um self for most people especially for
people in in parts of the world whether
they have
another set of problems they're dealing
with first which is trying to feed
themselves period
um but as it relates to health and
veganism plant-based diets what are some
of the stereotypes there that that
you've highlighted one that there is a
quantity of meat products that is
healthy what are the general stereotypes
there that are they need a dressing so a
couple of things that that is it healthy
to be on a plant-based diet let's just
deal with that first okay and I think as
long as you do it carefully and think
about it and take the right supplements
it is you have to supplement when you're
on a plant-based diet okay you have to
supplement certain things vitamin B12
iodine iodine pardon me
um
you got to watch your iron you've got to
watch your calcium but you can do it
safely okay but I just
the biggest myth that I want to bust is
that it's a diet for everybody it is not
veganism plant-based in particular is a
diet for the privileged people who can
choose to do so I can choose to do it
you can choose to do it if you live in a
developing country okay or no no don't
ever stop that not even living in a
developing country if you are Mrs Smith
working two minimum wage jobs okay in
this country trying to feed your kids
are you really going to be concerned
with your pulses and making sure the
supplements are right to actually feed
your kids so they can have a vegan diet
no you want to feed your kids all right
and so what annoys me about about
Evangelical uh plant-based and vegan is
not that people do it people should do
what they want to do but what they do is
they make other people feel bad by not
having their diet particularly when they
don't have the choice to do it that is
what that is what annoys me I've seen
some videos on social media we've
probably all seen them of certain
activist groups that want people to stop
eating animal products going into
supermarkets and taking the lid off of
the milk and just pouring it all over
the floor in protest if you were sat
with one of those people that goes into
supermarkets pours milk on the floor and
goes into the meat section and does
whatever
and they came to you and they said what
should we be doing instead in your
perspective
to
move people away from animal products
for moral or environmental reasons
whatever it might be what would be a
better strategy based on what you've you
believe in what you've studied we do not
need
ever we need to move the curve we do not
need everyone to be vegan we we don't we
okay there are going to be people who
are vegan and that's perfectly fine I
want to stress I am not energy vegan in
the slightest but what we need as a
world is for everyone to eat 10 to 20
Less meat today
that is achievable
don't eat meat at lunch don't eat meat
on Fridays whatever it is don't even
mean once a week we need to eat 10 to 20
percent less meat and Less meat products
why
for for two different reasons that the
environmental impact would be enormous
beyond anything the environmental impact
would be enormous and that would help
the the environment that's the first
thing it's interesting so cop 26 I think
was just finished and cop 27 is is
the the people were talking about
sustainable farming people were clearly
talking about fossil fuels all of these
need to talk about but no the term eat
less meat not eat no meat eat less meat
did not even make it to the discussion
it was not even mentioned in the in in
the final thing because people are too
afraid about the farm about the farm
Lobby okay
but that's because we're framing this in
a slightly the wrong way because people
think oh you want us to cut out meat
entirely you want us to destroy our
farming industry no we need to just eat
a little bit less meat all of us
immediately for the environment and
actually that will also turn to to our
health as well so that I think is the
framing we need to go for rather than
saying that veganism and everyone needs
to be everyone needs to be um vegan
because that puts people off
and that's whereas if you don't have
meat one day a week two days a week even
if you want to do it four days a week
whatever you want to do most people can
do that quite easily
you know on this discussion on this
debate
some people are very morally in touch
and you know they care a lot about the
environment and the world and I applaud
those people but then other people will
think and I've heard certain
commentators who I shant name say you're
not taking my stake from me I don't care
and and that's a real so so there has to
be something that feels like more
systemic that we do in society to really
affect change because people are I think
quite naturally often not always but
often quite selfish and they don't
really think about the big picture they
think well I'm not going to be alive to
observe the effects of those things
anyway so is there anything that we
could do at systemic level whether it's
supermarkets whether it's I don't know I
don't know tax whatever it is to try and
reduce the amount of that of meat that
people are eating
or is that the right approach I okay
okay I mean the the term taxation always
scares people it does yeah okay and I
guess actually punitive such as taxation
is always
always does two things it always
disproportionately affects poor people
and it always makes lawyers Rich two
things happen I think a better way of
doing it is to try and get people to
choose the healthier choice whatever the
health of your choice might be make that
the easier and cheaper choice now this
could be
um subsidizing it this could be putting
it in different parts of the supermarket
this could be
um
stopping subsidizing um Dairy you know
the the meat industry there are any
number of different things you can put
in place so that you sort of you can't
make something more expensive without
making something cheaper that's the
bottom line
otherwise it will is not Equitable so I
think that's what we need to do but
subtly once again I'm going to sound is
on the one hand I'm saying that there's
a safe dose of meat on the other hand
I'm saying eat less meat but that is
that is the answer it's a nuanced answer
where we eat too much meat and and for
us the privilege we at least have a
responsibility to try and eat to try and
eat less meat because we have the choice
we have to wear with all in in order to
do it and so I think that is what we
need to do we need to take a more
nuanced view about it less Evangelical
understand that people's socio-economic
place on the on on said ladder is
important about the choices which they
have we need to make healthier food
whatever you wanted healthy for the
planet healthy for the environment okay
we need to make it the cheaper easier
and more convenient Choice that's what
we need to do that is the answer for a
lot of environmental issues isn't it you
know when you think about developing
countries if we make the alternative
that is the environmentally friendly
alternative cheaper faster easier more
accessible people will naturally choose
it it's a cool friend Innovation I guess
versus
you let Market forces leave because the
moment you try and make people do
something a most of us are selfish we
don't like being told what to do whereas
if we sort of think we made the choice
because it's the easiest choice then
there's no choice because then because
then you just do it and I think that is
the way that we have to do it
interesting
let's talk about something else which I
feel like I was lied to about oh God
which is juice orange juice oh yes Apple
Juice I was told when I was young that
orange juice and apple juice and all
these juices was healthy so I spent 25
years waking up in the morning and
drinking as much of this fruit juice as
I possibly could
now when I read your book when I started
um speaking to other people when I spoke
to Tim Spector I found some alarming
things one of the really alarming things
you said was the comparison with
Coca-Cola
tell me about that so so orange juice or
apple juice but both of those juices in
particular have as much sugar
concentration exactly the same sugar
concentration as Coca-Cola is it not
different sugar it's not different sugar
so so it is different in terms of in the
juice because of its sauce so it
probably has more vitamin C it probably
has a couple more minerals okay yes
those are true but the actual
bottom line is it's still mostly sugar I
say mostly sugar I think 12 a
concentration sugar now and orange juice
same for Coca-Cola the sugar is exactly
the same sugar but yet when you do sugar
taxes you you tax the coca-colas of the
world iron Brews of the world but you
don't tax orange juice okay now I make a
huge distinction between orange juice
apple juice and eating the damn orange
because when you eat the orange
it's exactly the same source of food
right so you drink a a glass of juice
what happens is there is nothing to
digest because because of sugar so your
body just absorbs it whereas if you eat
exactly the source of food orange like
whole orange like a normal orange first
of all you chew yeah and so because
you're chewing your body then senses oh
chewing happening okay guys guys get an
order we're gonna about to receive
energy okay that's the first thing
second because your body then has to
work through the fiber this is the
caloric availability thing to then
extract the sugar
instead of having all of the sugar
absorbed into your blood all at once
because there's nothing there's nothing
to do it takes a little while down the
gut for the for the sugar to get in so
exactly the same amount of sugar and
exactly the same amount of calories is
delivered into your blood but over a
longer period of time and thirdly
because you're eating fiber it travels
further down the gut it makes you feel
Fuller you eat less of something else
during the day so that's the problem
with orange juice eat I I really think
that orange juice in very many ways is
worse than Coca-Cola not because of his
because when you are drinking a
Coca-Cola you know you're drinking a
Coca-Cola I'm drinking a Coca-Cola when
you're drinking orange juice a lot of
people think that this is the health
version this is I'm being healthy this
is what I should be drinking
whereas is that where is it is but it's
true you should eat an orange or drink
water or something else or drink it as a
treat drink it like you would drink
Coca-Cola the other thing you said was
about the alkaline diet now I read on
Instagram that alkaline water is better
for you so there was a period of my life
about a month where I just started
guzzling I said it's my system I said
please it's not alkaline water I don't
think we should put it in the fridge I
just want alkaline water and then I saw
some other thing which said alkaline
water is a total scam
you nodded your head when I said the
scam thing is alkaline water a scam yes
no
it's gam capital s c a m look what is
alcohol what where did this Alkali thing
come from so our blood pH
is 7.4 and above seven is alkali below
seven is acidic okay so it is slightly
Alkali and so some guy and I I
interviewed him actually
um just before he went to jail we'll
discuss why in a second
um just before he went to jail the guy
who founded the Alkali diet okay a guy
called Robert Young Dr Robert Young
um who said that well if we have
um an Alkali blood in order to keep
ourselves healthy yes and our Alkali
blood is healthy blood we need to eat
Alkali Foods this is his his thesis the
problem is it completely ignores the
presence of the stomach now the stomach
as far as a compartment in our body goes
is the most acidic compartment in our
body pH 1.5 it's like battery acid but
then all the food we eat goes into our
stomach gets acidified and then as it
goes into our small intestine it gets
neutralized back to seven again this is
just biology so nothing we eat
everything we eat is acidified and
neutralized nothing we eat will change
the pH of our blood that's the first
that's the first thing so if you drink
the water it becomes pH 1.5 and ph7 by
the time the water is absorbed into our
body it's pH seven whatever its starting
pH was the second problem however is the
taxonomy is what they consider Alkali
and acidic so I'll just give one example
they consider citrus fruits lemons to be
Alkali except lemons contain citric acid
it is a citrus fruit and vitamin C which
is otherwise called ascorbic acid it is
an acidic fruit
so how can it be considered itself
Alkali I don't even understand that
there's a famous I don't want to get
myself into trouble but there's a
there's a there's a famous image
of a certain actress who runs a certain
website beginning with G and ending with
p you know where where is
I'm not good at quizzes or crosswords or
anything but so so where she's drinking
her high pH water and squeezing in lemon
juice now what happens when you put acid
into a high pH water The Alkali diet
makes absolutely no sense whatsoever the
question is why do people stick to it
okay and people stick to it because the
Alkali movement considers meat and dairy
products acidic leave aside the fact
that meat are full of blood and his
alkaline would leave that alone but
because they consider meat and dairy
products acidic in effect you don't eat
meat and dairy it is a vegan diet it's a
plant-based diet so Alkali food is a
restrictive plant-based diet which is
why people stick to it which is why
people lose weight
a point of losing weight
um there's this thing called The Weight
Watchers which you talk about in one of
the chapters of your book chapter 11.
yep Weight Watchers are these things
good these like groups of people that
are like losing weight together
so I think that really does depend on
who you are and um and what you like a
lot of people swear by it because they
enjoy the community Spirit the fact that
there is a group motivation
um to try and help you do stuff and
we've seen this right we've seen it
where it's easier to go jogging or
exercising when you've already made the
appointment at 8am on a Sunday you are
less likely to call your maintenance I'm
back bunking out I I'll go because I
really it's a social path it's a social
Pact
that being said there are public
weigh-ins and there are people who are a
bit shy there are people who are
mortified that they actually have to
weigh themselves in front of other
people and I get so stressed out I'm
stressed out about this so it suits
people of a certain character who like
that and I think they should keep to
that because it's a strategy it works
the people who really hate it with the
passion of a thousand Sons I think they
should stay away I think they should
find find another because then it could
tilt some people into Eating Disorders
if you take the wrong if you force
everyone to do it okay it could it could
go the wrong way so find the people who
it works for and by all means they need
to to to to stick to that whereas other
people need to find another way is it
true that I think a lot of people
believe now that there's a sort of
certain
a default weight size based on our
genetics that we have that will keep
returning to we kind of touched on a
little bit earlier on
um
regardless of what diet we do so I'm
thinking of some you know families often
look quite similar yes in terms of body
shape and size Etc
um I'm wondering how much like control
they have against fighting against those
genes to to get a you know six-pack abs
not saying that's a sustainable healthy
place to get to but
is it significantly harder for certain
people if their family is maybe a little
bit more larger to get to to fight
against that and get to a different
state and then stay in that state yes
undoubtedly so so there is certainly
what we call it used to be called a set
point hypothesis meaning that each of us
has a weight we actually protect it's
probably more Nuance than that set range
there's a range that you can actually
range that we find easy to keep their
weight so in other words I'm not
thinking about my body weight at the
moment and this is the weight that I am
but I wish I was half a stone or a stone
lighter but if I lost that half a stone
I would then have to think about food
all the time to keep that half a stone
off whereas I get half a stone more and
I don't raise my weight anymore so
that's the idea where there's a there is
a a weight range is easy to protect and
each of us is different there are some
people who are skinny there's some
people who just find it more difficult
to say no to food than others that's
pretty much it so some people's
thermostat and food is set a little
higher than others and you defend that
thermostat 25 degrees versus 20 degrees
and there's really next to nothing you
can do you can shift from 25 to 24 and a
half and maybe after Christmas you're 25
and 0.5 okay and so you shift around
there but the likelihood of you getting
down to 20 and staying there you can get
down to 20 okay if you do some stupid
diet but the moment you're paying you
ping back you ping right back up again
so we do defend
um there is very very little choice in
inverted commas in where we end up with
the body weight over a lifetime at any
given meal we have a choice you think
right pizza or no pizza pizza or no
pizza but over thousands of feeding
events
there's very little Choice what then you
reference age there do we get fatter
with age because generally I look at you
know I'd say younger people typically
have a slightly leaner physique and then
something seems to happen along the way
is that just a false observation I have
or is there some science that supports
the the gaining of weight as we age
there's science the a weight is
inexorably up okay even though we've
stopped growing when we're we're 18
years old actually there's some later
science I used to I used to if you would
ask me the question five years ago I
would have said that by the time we had
40 or 50 our metabolism starts to dip
that's part of the reason that's not
true as it turns out our metabolism
doesn't start to dip till we're 60. okay
but what happens as we get older are a
number of different things first of all
we tend to get richer we tend to get
more money
we tend to sit on our ass more okay just
in terms of the type of jobs we do okay
and because of both of those things we
tend to exercise less because we're
busier and so we lose muscle mass those
are all three things metabolically the
most active part of your body are the
muscles so when you're younger and
you're doing things and you have more
time to go to the gym first of all your
metabolic rate is linked to the amount
of muscle you have and so as you get
older you're set on your RS you eat a
bit more we don't eat less we eat more
and we can buy richer food because we
got more money and you begin to lose
muscle mass so all of those things put
together means that you inexorably
become larger then what happens at 60
years old your metabolism then starts to
drop as well and then you get even
larger middle age spread Etc
so on that point about the more muscles
you have the higher your metabolism that
means if I'm if I've got big muscles
then I'm burning my food faster yes
fantastic news I'm going to work out
later lift some weights um because I was
really started by that I after I read it
in your book about us gaining more and
more weight as we age I Googled it and
the healthcare research and quality
agency said that we naturally tend to
gain weight as we age to the tune of one
to two pounds per year according to
their review and that's from the agency
for healthcare research and quality
which I found quite startling but
completely accurate so the numbers so
what what the numbers that we have is
yeah I think that's right actually so
between 20 and 50 years old those 30
years intervening the average person
average will gain about 15 kilos in
weight which is 32 points yes two pounds
a year one to two pounds a year 15 kilos
in weight is gained over 30 years on
average some gain very little others
gain a hell of a lot more we look at
ourselves in a mirror I look at myself
in the mirror um but that's true I don't
want to be that guy
mate I don't know how much choice you
have what can I do to to to try and stay
because for me it's not really about the
weight thing or how you look it's more
about like I
I am I don't know how to say this but
there was this big set of stairs the
other day
really really long set of stairs leading
down to this Lake I was in Indonesia a
couple of months ago
um and I I remember thinking about those
stairs and thinking God if I wasn't you
know
athletic and strong and didn't have good
knees and things like that there's no
way I'd be able to get down this long
winding hand carved set of Indonesian
stairs so that I could go on this boat
trip that I was going to go on and I
just thought about how it was a weird
thing I know this is kind of a strange
story to tell but it crossed my mind I
got to the bottom of the stairs and I
turned to the person I was with and was
literally like you know that's why I've
got to stay in shape for as long as I
can because I want to do these boat
trips and I want to go on this little
rafting thing but I won't even be able
to access it unless I can go down up and
down those stairs like 200 meters of
stairs down this Cliff
um so that's what I care about I care
about being active and strong and fit
for as long as I possibly can and I from
what you've said about gravity and
weight
um being overweight is going to inhibit
my chances of being able to do those
stairs so so that I think there are two
elements there first of all there is
doing the things that we want to do okay
like that because you're exactly right
these are the things which I can still
do that I can still walk up a mountain
or down a mountain because I'm still fit
enough to do that and I want to stay as
fit as long as I can to do that and
weight will inhibit that undoubtedly
but then there's a second element to
actually consider now there's Healthy
Look none of us are going to live longer
we hopefully
and anyway if we left lived longer but
was unhealthy would you want to live
longer so you want to live longer but
healthier for longer okay and
undoubtedly the thing that is closest
related to health when you age is not
your total weight there's a role to play
there the amount of muscle you have it
is your muscle mass as you age
independent of how much fat you have
okay that will determine how healthy you
are as you age so as so now the moment
now I'm talking about going into the 60s
and the 70s rather than when one is able
to go down to 200 meter set of steps
okay so now as you get older the most
crucial bit of information is to
maintain resistance training not lifting
and that's not what I'm talking about
sitting on a wall getting up and down a
chair because of that the amount of
muscle mass you have really really
really marks the level of Health that
you're going to get and then the science
is startling it is so so so related
independent of independence of weight
you know from from there so muscle mass
is the most important for healthy aging
the moment you get 60 70 plus
interesting okay so I'll keep I'll keep
doing resistance training correct always
keep resistance training and lifting
weights as long as I can lifting weights
as long as you can at some point you
won't be able to lift weights just
because don't write me off don't write
me off John the hubris of Youth yeah
you just assume you'll always be able to
do what you can do now I I yeah it's
something I think a lot about and I
think a lot of people will watch this
podcast because
probably especially this time of year
we're in January they'll probably be
trying to find ways that they can cut
fat they want to be a bit skinnier you
said you think you said half a stone you
want to lose I'm in the same place I
think most people want to lose a half a
stone or something
what is the way that you would suggest
to do that the simple way you know not
the like like in complicated go buy this
guy's course and do three million
sit-ups whatever the simple advice you
would give someone that's hoping to
create sort of sustainable weight loss
okay so this this something's like the
last page of of the why calories don't
count book but it is a set of numbers
and I know I said not to count calories
but it's a set of numbers that is that
you can apply to whatever diet you like
so the first is the amount of protein
you eat and you need to try and focus on
trying to keep to about 16 of the energy
in your day okay from protein 16 and
there's a sweet spot so if you eat too
much
and you're not lifting you're stressing
your kidneys because your kidneys have
to get rid of the nitrogen from the
protein okay so 16 is a sweet spot and
it doesn't mean steaks only it can mean
beans tofu any kind of protein from from
anywhere 16 second is fiber we need to
eat as much fiber as physically possible
okay 30 grams we want to aim for
although we're looking at the moment on
average in this country we're probably
only eating 15 grams we need to double
the amount of fiber we actually eat
third we need to limit the amount of
added sugars into our diet added sugars
meaning sugar is not tied up in fiber
powdered stuff uh uh um maple syrup
Algarve nectar all those are added
sugars you put in keep it to five
percent or less of the of the energy
content in your day and those are the
three numbers that that I want you to
think about so 16 of protein 30 grams of
fiber five percent or less of added
sugars apply that to whatever you want
what Keto
um whatever you want to do apply that
and I think that will be a sustainable
healthy way to eat
now there's been a lot said about
exercise as a weight loss strategy a lot
of people think you know what I will
just run every day and I'll lose weight
in your books you said
um the problem with using exercises
weight loss strategy is that doing
exercise makes you feel hungry you can't
outrun a bad diet is exercise a good
strategy for weight loss it is a good
strategy for weight loss if you're an
Olympic athlete or a Tour de France
writer what if you are a muggle like me
a muggle like you a muggle like me then
exercise okay exercise you can never
replace the goodness and wonderfulness
and health benefits of exercise is
exercise exercise a good weight loss
strategy for a muggle like Steve no
it's a good weight maintenance tool
though so in other words once you've
lost the weight which means you need to
be less somehow exercise helps you keep
the weight off so once you've actually
lost the weight that you that you're
aiming for whatever whatever that might
be then do the exercise and that will
help keep the weight off but it's not
going to help me get the weight off in
the first place no
that seems to sit in contradiction to
what my old personal trainer only
because we don't do it enough
so now if you had okay let's put it this
way let's put it this way the way that
it would work is if you had a personal
trainer and a chef then what would
happen is your personal trainer will
make you work hard and your Chef will
make your meal okay therefore what
happens is it is controlled on both
sides that is not typically what happens
in in the real world I go on my run my
cycle what have you I come back I'm
ravenously hungry I open the fridge and
i stuff my mouth full of carbs that is
that that is my story right and so it is
very difficult to control your diet
after you've done long Hard Exercise
bouts because you get ravenously hungry
so professional sports teams a day
exercise ridiculous they train three
times a day so that's that's that but
they still have chefs and dietitians and
they eat what they what what they the
you know the canteen puts out for them
which is healthy food so someone is
looking after their diet for them but
they are burning so much they don't have
to worry too much about how much they
eat whereas we we do it's I know it's
counter-intuitive in some sense but it's
purely because we don't exercise enough
and is that also because ultimately
because the brain is controlling our
feeding Behavior so the brain is knows
that we've just been for a run so it's
it's adding
to our appetite yes uh a serp a surplus
to make us return to that that weight
it's trying to protect there's that and
there's also our own internal psychology
on it because now you feel a bit smug
you say oh I went for my run on Sunday
morning you know and then so I can eat
what I want and there's that element too
so suddenly when you normally would say
oh I better not eat so much today I
haven't there are some internal controls
that we sometimes have those internal
controls are weakened once we've
actually had our exercise because we
feel that we have earned the food that's
in front of us
body positivity yes sir that is one of
the things you discuss in chapter nine
of why calories don't count now body
positivity
um I think there's a lot lots of pieces
to it one of the I guess the central
idea is that there's no such thing as an
unhealthy weight
I don't want to mischaracterize the
movement but um
what do you think about body positivity
so I understand where body positivity
comes from okay because obviously there
is a lot of waist stigma in society
um weight stigma for whatever reason is
one of the last rubicons left across if
if you or I made any disparaging
comments in public uh or anything about
someone's gender someone's
um sexual orientation skin color
whatever we get fired
but yet some people can make comments
about people's body size and have no and
it's perfectly acceptable how can that
be acceptable so I understand where body
positivity comes from but I think that
body positivity doesn't needs a little
bit more Nuance in their in their
argument so
why is it bad to be fat
we we talked about this carrying too
much fat because of the association with
disease but why okay and it's because of
the amount of fat we can store safely so
people misunderstand what happens when
you gain weight and lose weight they
think that you gain fat cells and lose
fat cells not true your fat cells are
like balloons they get bigger when you
gain weight and they get smaller when
you lose weight but they stay the same
number okay so what happens is the
safest place to store fat is in your fat
cells because they're your fat it's when
they're not in the fat that they go to
your muscle your liver they begin to
cause trouble okay and that's when you
become ill but the interesting thing is
everybody's fat cells can store
different amounts of fat before the fat
leaks out shall we say okay from that I
mentioned earlier East Asian South Asian
people we don't we can't store as much
fat safely than white people than than
Polynesians so the moment you get past
your safe fat carrying capacity you will
become ill now for some people that is
when that that skinny people with type
to diabetes and there are larger people
without uh that are that are healthy
that's because there's differing amounts
of safe fat carrying capacity but the
moment you go past your own personal
safe fat carrying capacity you will
become ill so in a big room you can have
health at many sizes
but there is no Health at every size
because you will become ill if you
become too big
interest that's the new ones
that doesn't mean I blame the people
suffering from obesity please but it
doesn't help anybody to not look at the
health issues that are associated with
carrying too much fat we have to discuss
it in a non-stigmatizing and non-blaming
language but we do need to be honest
about it yeah and I think we can both
agree that just generally
um targeting anyone which I've seen a
lot of a lot of like someone will be on
the front cover of a magazine and then
someone will like quote retweet it and
attack them and say that they're not
healthy and it's promoting
um bad you know bad body standards or
health standards whatever like whether
scientifically that's true or not you
are without a [__] about an [__] for
doing that you know what I mean you're
an artist and counterproductive
counterproductive it's making someone
feel like awful it's not you know it's
making people have the stigma as you've
said and it's if you think about it from
a psychology standpoint make shaming
people for how they feel is probably not
going to help
um them be proactive in making changes
if you think about how motivation works
with you know self-esteem and how we
feel and wanting to feel positive and
high self-esteem to make changes in our
life it's probably not an effective
strategy to attack people for the for
their body image regardless of whether
whether or not it's a [__] move I
mean it does it exactly so I think we
can both agree on that yeah and um it's
super interesting I I I'm on my journey
with with eating in food so it's been a
huge pleasure to speak to you about this
because I feel now a lot closer to
understanding and having Clarity on on
what I should beating and what I
shouldn't what I really love about your
message is that it is centered in
um away from restriction and towards
positivity with food and to really like
loving food as opposed to being as
you've said with that word I think it's
as fix it no what was it that Bloody
orthorexia orthorexia it's not about
fearing foods which is an awful place to
get into I think we're getting closer
and closer to that kind of being fearful
of foods
it's just about I guess making
um a little bit more informed choices
um but also keeping the balance and the
and the chocolate and the other things
that are part of all of our Lives what
what's your mission
I'm assuming you have one when I asked
the question and I shouldn't do that do
you have a mission and if so what is it
oh so my my mission is to uh
destigmatize obesity
and try because look it is it is going
to roll like a tidal wave into every
single country across the world so my
mission is to destigmatize it because
destigmatizing taking away the weight
stigma means that we can have an adult
non-hysterical conversation with people
treating the patient the patient the
policy makers because at the moment
government thinks that a lot of it is
personal responsibility okay there is
obviously some personal responsibility
it's my health it's my children's health
that I understand but until we put money
in the right places fix the environment
make sure that the the treatment and
supports making healthier food cheaper
that's government responsibility and so
if we destigmatize obesity in the
population we can then have this
conversation with policy makers and get
them to put the resources in the right
place that is my mission because at the
moment the resources are being put in
the wrong place which is why we're not
solving obesity at the moment if I voted
FIFA prime minister
um and there was a couple of simple
things that you could do I think you
talked to it yep broadly there about
some of them what would be some of the
policies you would introduced to
Target the systemic issues that are
causing obesity in our population so day
one I would make healthier food cheaper
and this doesn't only mean carrots I
mean that they're going to be healthy
foods even within a chocolate bar
there's gonna be a way of actually
putting more fiber and protein in a
chocolate bar or frozen lasagna or
vegetables okay I think we need to make
healthier food cheaper all the way
across the board that's the first thing
we've got to do
um and that's the first thing I would do
the day after the day I'm prime minister
because then the default choice that you
make even if you're poor when you walk
into the supermarket is going to be
healthy which is not true at the moment
the moment that happens then I think we
are one step forward in trying to solve
the Obesity and diet related
epidemic that's actually around us today
but just to be clear you're not going to
cancel chocolate I'm not going to cancel
chocolate I'm going to try and make it
healthier you got my vote I love that
you're gonna make it healthier and
cheaper yeah you've got my vote
Giles thank you so much we have a
closing tradition on this podcast oh yes
the last guest asks a question for the
next guest
oh this is a long one
hmm okay
what is the worst thing that has
happened
in the last year it continues what is
the best thing that's happened
to you in the last year
from which have you learned the most
what is the worst thing that has
happened in the last year what is the
best thing that has happened to you in
the last year
from which have you learned the most
the worst thing that has happened to me
in the last year I think was we were
smack bang I forgot in the middle of
Omicron I think of of that
um and then my mum ended up with a
stroke so my mom she's fine now she's
fine now but my mum lives in California
which is which is where I'm from and
then life became very difficult I was
trying to find a way to get out there
without getting stuck out there anyway
that she she ended up being better but
there was a period of time there where I
was really seriously stressed about
about the whole about the whole scenario
that probably was the worst that
probably was the worst thing
um it turned out to be fine because she
was fine but it could easily have not
been have have not been fine
um so that that was probably the worst
of the worst thing over the past over
the past year that would probably be it
um because my own you know close family
is fine now what is the best thing that
has happened to me over the past year
that's an interesting question I'm not
sure I know what that I've had a good
year I've had a good year and I think I
can't deny that I'm privileged I've had
I've had a good year work has gone well
other things have gone well my family
are still with me my son is at Uni so I
think my family has been the best thing
as with most it's very boring answer but
as with many things um has been the best
thing that has happened to me over the
past year is that that's a cop-out
answer no yes again but there was a
third part to that answer with the
question which was from which have you
learned the most ah
from which I learned the most I think
that it's always I always think you
learn the most when things go downhill
um because that's the most that's
because then you start to reassess uh
priorities you start to think so
undoubtedly uh um yeah I should have got
that the first time around no no I think
you learn a lot more about yourself when
things go wrong rather than when things
go well you like it when things go well
it's when things when proverbial stuff
hits the fan that's when that's when you
learn more about yourself did it make
you reassess your priorities it did make
me reassess my priorities actually
because I began thinking okay uh um you
you know all these things which I was
planning on doing should I I'm Gonna
Cancel them now I'm Gonna Cancel them
now now now now
um you know and actually and actually uh
head back but but after a couple of days
my mom became a lot quicker she told me
look I have got people here supporting
me now I need you to come back a little
bit later so that I so I don't need
everyone my mom said to me I don't need
everyone here now that's not gonna I
need someone here in in a periodic uh
place place and time and so that's what
I did I went back later rather than
immediately although I did end up
canceling a bunch of things reassessing
the the importance of things to leave
almost almost immediately my mom stopped
me and is there a broader point I
reflect on when I spoke to Tim Spector
who's one of the quotes from the front
of your book here
um he talked about the passing of his
father and how that is part of the
inspiration that sent him off to to
think more about food the food he was
eating how he was treating himself
um and then I believe he had a stroke
himself which again was a bit of a sort
of tectonic
earthquake in one's life
when we see the health of those we love
and those that we are genetically
related to
um
have instances like that tragic
instances like Strokes or other health
issues or disease
is there something in the mind that goes
that kind of makes you look in the
mirror and go
sh you know like how am I living my life
what can I do to avoid
um having a similar diagnosis or ending
up in the same place or those kinds of
things
it is that is an interesting that is a
very interesting point because genetic
tests aside the most guarant not
guaranteed way the easiest way of
telling
the future of how where you're going to
end up is to look at your parents it's
very depressing I know but what do your
parents look like
what if they're still alive what
diseases do they have if they're not
what they did what did they die of this
is very morbid but but it's not because
you look at it it's it's a picture in
essence not 100 of your future you it's
certainly more accurate than any genetic
test at the moment and so exactly that
you look and it says oh God what did my
mom what what what did I have now I
gotta add Strokes into my risk you know
and then and then I look at my son what
is he going to do but do I need him to
exercise more it does reassess to say
that well is there anything I could do
yeah uh you know to avoid just just
ending up with a stroke so it does make
you think about things it also made me
think about the fact
that even though my mom was doing
something else not about that she was in
hospital yet there were people this
Insidious pseudoscience that we were
talking about was still able to seep
into a hospital into the person next to
her and people were talking about it
when they were seriously ill and not
even just talking about about
um about food they were talking about
trying to make themselves better but
through pseudoscience and that was the
other thing which jumped out of me I
said oh my God this can't you you know
it's there even in hospital even when
people are seriously ills people are
still talking maybe because they're
seriously ill they're talking about this
pseudoscientific approaches to to their
health and that's why your work is so
important Charles
um these books are fantastic they're
very accessible books they they're based
in evidence not necessarily opinion or
pseudoscience or anything like that
they're based in scientific evidence and
several decades of of work and research
um so I thank you for writing them
they've been a pleasure for me to read I
recommend both of them sometimes when I
have guests on this podcast I'll say get
you know tell my audience to get this
one or the other but I think they're
both absolutely fantastic books and
necessary and they're very very
interlinked you know those there's
things in um
why calories don't count Builds on a lot
of the stuff that I read in gene eating
as well so there's a they have a
relationship between them and it's been
fantastic to talk to you you're a very
um animated speaker which is what makes
a good podcast guest because people can
stay engaged for longer we see that
Trend and that's why I love your
delivery and your articulation of all
the points makes a big big difference so
thank you for being such a brilliant
guest on the podcast thank you so much
for having me
quick one in television of our podcast
sponsors and I want to talk to you for a
second about their built for business
vpro platform in today's Working World
the office is pretty much anywhere and
Intel V Pro means you can remotely
manage repair and protect devices across
your entire organization no matter how
large or small giving me and my team
peace of mind to work wherever we choose
to for my it team whether on premise or
via Cloud behind the corporate firewall
or not Intel's vpro comprehensive
manageability has us covered this is
something that is so important to me I
you know I'm a huge believer in employee
flexibility and Trust so having features
like this are super helpful so to find
out more search intel.co.uk vpro and let
me know how you get on you got to the
end of this podcast whenever someone
gets to the end of this podcast I feel
like I owe them a greater debt of
gratitude because that means you listen
to the whole thing and hopefully that
suggests that you enjoyed it if you are
at the end and you enjoyed this podcast
could you do me a little bit of a favor
and hit that subscribe button that's one
of the clearest indicators we have that
this episode was a good episode and we
look at that on all of the episodes to
see which episodes generated the most
subscribers thank you so much and I'll
see you again next time
[Music]
thank you